these days
scientists know how you inherit
characteristics from your parents
they're able to calculate probabilities
of having a specific trait or getting a
genetic disease according to the
information they have from the parents
and the family history
but how is this possible to understand
how traits pass from one living being to
its descendants
we need to go back in time to the 19th
century and a man named gregor mendel
mendel was an austrian monk and
biologist who loved to work with plants
by breeding the pea plants he was
growing in the monasteries garden he
discovered the principles that rule
heredity
in one of the most classic examples
mendel combined a pure bred yellow
seeded plant with a pure bred green
seeded plant
and he got only yellow seeds he called
the yellow color trait the dominant one
because it was expressed in all the new
seeds then he let the new yellow-seeded
hybrid plants self-fertilize
and in this second generation he got
both yellow and green seeds
which meant that the green trait had
been hidden by the dominant yellow
he called this hidden trait the
recessive trait from those results
mendel inferred that each trait depends
on a pair of factors one of them coming
from the mother
and the other from the father now we
know that these factors are called
alleles and represent the different
variations of a gene
depending on which type of allele mendel
found in each seed we can have what we
call a homozygous p
where both alleles are identical and
what we call a heterozygous p
when the two alleles are different this
combination of alleles is known as
genotype
and its result being yellow or green is
called phenotype
to clearly visualize how alleles are
distributed amongst descendants we can
use a diagram called the punnett square
you just place the different alleles on
both axes and then you figure out the
possible combinations
let's look at mendel's ps for example
let's write the dominant yellow allele
as an uppercase y
and the recessive green allele has a
lowercase y the uppercase y
always overpowers his lowercase friend
so the only time you get green babies is
if you have two
lowercase ys in mendel's first
generation the yellow homozygous p-mom
will give each p
kid a yellow dominant allele and the
green homozygous p
dad will give a green recessive allele
so all the p kids will be yellow
heterozygous
then in the second generation where the
two heterozygous kids marry
their babies could have any of the three
possible genotypes showing the two
possible phenotypes in a three to one
proportion
but even peas have a lot of
characteristics for example besides
being yellow or green peas may be round
or wrinkled
so we could have all these possible
combinations round yellow peas round
green peas wrinkled yellow peas and
wrinkled green peas
to calculate the proportions for each
genotype and phenotype we can use a
punnett square too
of course this will make it a little
more complex and lots of things are more
complicated than peas
like say people these days scientists
know a lot more about genetics and
heredity
and there are many other ways in which
some characteristics are inherited but
it all started with mendel
and his peas
you